Phase level progress tracking proposal (#1875)
kanisterio/kanister: design/phase-level-progress-tracking.md

# Problem Statement

Kanister actions are triggered by creating ActionSet resource. The status field in ActionSet CR represents the status of Kanister operation. The action completion percentage is set by calculating the weights given on phases ([https://github.com/kanisterio/kanister/blob/master/design/progress-tracking.md](https://github.com/kanisterio/kanister/blob/master/design/progress-tracking.md) ).

> This goal of this proposal is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal of this proposal is
```

        // Artifacts created by this phase.
        Artifacts map[string]Artifact `json:"artifacts,omitempty"`
        // DeferPhase is the phase that is executed at the end of an action
        // irrespective of the status of other phases in the action
        DeferPhase Phase `json:"deferPhase,omitempty"`
}

 // Phase is subcomponent of an action.
 type Phase struct {
        Name     string                 `json:"name"`
        State    State                  `json:"state"`
        Output   map[string]interface{} `json:"output,omitempty"`
+       Progress PhaseProgress          `json:"progress,omitempty"` <-----
 }

+type PhaseProgress struct {
+       ProgressPercent       int64
+       LastTransitionTime    *metav1.Time
+       SizeUploadedB         int64
+       EstimatedTimeSeconds  int64
+       EstimatedUploadSizeB  int64
+}
```

### Action progress tracking

Action can consists of multiple phases. These all phases can take consume different duration for completion based on the operations it performs. All phases for the action can be given equal weight-age and to calculate action progress completion %, average of all phase completion %ge can be calculated

```

> % completion of action = sum(% Phase completion of all the phases)/ no. of phases

Reviewer 2: can we have an example here please that explains if an action has three phases and second phase is being run and completed 30%?
What would I see in the actionset status.

Author: Sure, I will add that

> % completion of action = sum(% Phase completion of all the phases)/ no. of phases

Reviewer: Are we not including the combined result as part of `ActionStatus`?

Reviewer: We have ActionSetStatus.Progress and Phase level Progress, but not ActionStatus since use can only see actionset status. Is that the reason progress of each action is not included?

Author: Since ActionSet is supposed to perform single action only, the ActionSet progress is the same as Action progress. So by ActionSet.Progress users can get information about Action progress as well.

}
```

**Kanister function interface**

```
type Func interface {
+       Progress
        RequiredArgs() []string
        Arguments() []string
        Exec(context.Context, param.TemplateParams, map[string]interface{}) (map[string]interface{}, error)
 }
```

The PhaseProgress.ProgressPercent would be the of progress the functions it consists of.

### Kanister functions progress tracking

On high level we can divide the Kanister functions into two groups

### Datamover Kanister functions

Kanister data mover functions (like BackupData, CopyVolumeData, RestoreData, etc) use Kopia to snapshot filesystem and move data to/from objects.

While snapshotting, kopia provides the info about progress on the terminal

```
$ kopia --log-level=error --config-file=/tmp/kopia-repository.config --log-dir=/tmp/kopia-log snapshot --progress-update-interval=5s /data
 / 1 hashing, 118 hashed (546.9 MB), 0 cached (0 B), uploaded 0 B, estimated 4.5 GB (12.1%) 35s left
 * 0 hashing, 136 hashed (1.4 GB), 0 cached (0 B), uploaded 244 B, estimated 4.5 GB (30.1%) 30s left
```

The command output can be parsed to get the progress metadata.

### Non-datamover Kanister functions

> TBD

Reviewer 2: Even though it's not decided as of now, to actually implement this we will have to have something here right? For example either hard code or something else, otherwise would we be able to implement this design?

Author: Makes sense. We have discussed a couple of idea, will add it here. Thanks

### Updating actionset status

> [TrackActionProgress](https://github.com/kanisterio/kanister/blob/master/pkg/progress/action.go#L47) function is responsible for periodically updating progress for the action in ActionSet resource status.

Reviewer: How are we deciding the period for updating the progress?

Author: That would be const period - 5 or 10s

### Datamover Kanister functions

Kanister data mover functions (like BackupData, CopyVolumeData, RestoreData, etc) use Kopia to snapshot filesystem and move data to/from objects.

While snapshotting, kopia provides the info about progress on the terminal

```
$ kopia --log-level=error --config-file=/tmp/kopia-repository.config --log-dir=/tmp/kopia-log snapshot --progress-update-interval=5s /data
 / 1 hashing, 118 hashed (546.9 MB), 0 cached (0 B), uploaded 0 B, estimated 4.5 GB (12.1%) 35s left
 * 0 hashing, 136 hashed (1.4 GB), 0 cached (0 B), uploaded 244 B, estimated 4.5 GB (30.1%) 30s left
```

The command output can be parsed to get the progress metadata.

### Non-datamover Kanister functions

Non-datamover Kanister functions like `KubeTask`, `KubeExec`, `KubeOps`, `ScaleWorkload`, etc allow users to perform operations like executing scripts on a Pod or managing K8s resources. The duration it takes to execute these functions depends on different factors like the type of operations, function arguments, and types of commands listed in BP in the case of KubeExec or KubeTask functions. We can roughly divide these function execution into 3 steps.

> - Prerequisites - which include preparing Pod specs, creating the pod and waiting for it to be ready.

Author: ```suggestion
- Prerequisites - which include steps to perform before running actual operations like setting up env, preparing Pod specs, creating the K8s resources and waiting for them to be ready.
```

> - Execution - This is the step where the function performs operations.
> - Cleanup - Operations like deleting pods or cleaning up resources

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Execution - this is the step where the function performs its operations.
- Cleanup - operations like deleting pods or cleaning up resources.
```

> Since there is no standard way to check the progress of these functions, we can divide the progress equally into 3 giving each step equal weightage i.e 33.33%. E.g once the prerequisite step is completed, the progress can be set to 33.33%. And 66.66% once the specified operations are completed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since there is no standard way to check the progress of these functions, we can
divide the progress equally into 3 giving each step equal weightage, i.e.,
33.33%. For example, once the prerequisite step is completed, the progress can
be set to 33.33%, and 66.66% once the specified operations are completed.
```

> A few functions like `ScaleWorkload` may not have any prerequisite step. In that case, the progress can be set to 0 till the operation completes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A few functions like `ScaleWorkload` may not have any prerequisite step. In
that case, the progress can be set to 0 till the operation completes.
```

> ### Updating actionset status

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Updating ActionSet `status`
```

> [TrackActionProgress](https://github.com/kanisterio/kanister/blob/master/pkg/progress/action.go#L47) function is responsible for periodically updating progress for the action in ActionSet resource status.
> 
> Refactor TrackActionsProgress to remove weight based progress calculation to use Progress interface implemented by functions.
> 
> Pass additional parameter Phase to the TrackActionsProgress which can be used to get progress of the function in execution.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following changes are required to update the ActionSet `status`.

- [TrackActionProgress](https://github.com/kanisterio/kanister/blob/master/pkg/progress/action.go#L47)
  function is currently responsible for periodically updating the progress of an
  action in the ActionSet resource `status`.
  
  Refactor `TrackActionsProgress` to remove the weight-based progress calculation
  and use the `Progress` interface implemented by functions.
  
  Pass an additional `Phase` parameter to the `TrackActionsProgress`` that can be
  used to get the progress of the Kanister function being executed.
```

```
+                               go func() {
+                                       // progress update is computed on a best-effort basis.
+                                       // if it exits with error, we will just log it.
+                                       if err := progress.TrackActionsProgress(ctx, c.crClient, as.GetName(), as.GetNamespace(), p); err != nil {
+                                               log.Error().WithError(err)
+                                       }
+                               }()
                                output, err = p.Exec(ctx, *bp, action.Name, *tp)

```

> Implement Progress() function on Phase type to return Progress of the Kanister function

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Implement `Progress()` function on the `Phase`` type to return the progress
  of the Kanister function.
```

```
+func (p *Phase) Progress() (crv1alpha1.PhaseProgress, error) {
+       return p.f.Stats()
+}
```

> Once we have information about Progress of current function, the Phase ProgressPercent and Action ProgressPercent in the ActionSet status can be updated by computing the average.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Use the progress of the current function to compute the average values and
  update the `Phase.ProgressPercent` and `Action.ProgressPercent` in the
  ActionSet `status`.
```
